Convert Swift Differentiable Programming Implementation Overview to Markdown (#40443)
swiftlang/swift: docs/DifferentiableProgrammingImplementation.md

//  original args   result      derivative wrt args    derivative wrt result
```

The JVP function returns a tuple with two elements:
- The original result of type `U`.
- A linear approximation function called the “differential”, which takes derivatives with respect to arguments and returns the derivative with respect to the result.

The VJP function type is:

```swift
//  (T0, ...)      ->  (U,    (U.TangentVector)   -> (T0.TangentVector, ...))
//   ^                  ^      ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~        ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
//  original args   result     derivative wrt result    derivative wrt args
```

The VJP function returns a tuple with two elements:
- The original result of type `U`.
- A backpropagation function called the “pullback”, which takes the derivatives with respect to the result and returns the derivative with respect to arguments.

> TODO: Explain typing rules for functions with `inout` parameters.

### Registration

JVP and VJP functions can be registered using the `@derivative` attribute. JVP functions should return a tuple with labels `(value: ..., differential: ...)`. VJP functions should return a tuple with labels `(value: ..., pullback: ...)`.

> For usage examples of the `@derivative` attribute, please see [this mailing list response](https://groups.google.com/a/tensorflow.org/d/msg/swift/k62Uwnc-EYc/Cncb7mxtCAAJ), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `ax^2 + bx + c`.

Reviewer: I don't think we should refer to mailing list responses to show examples.  Usage of `@derivative` is well-documented in https://github.com/rxwei/swift-evolution/blob/autodiff/proposals/0000-differentiable-programming.md#derivative-attribute and we should link to that instead.

Author: Could you provide a suggested change of exactly how you want the new sentence worded?

Reviewer: For usage examples of the `@derivative` attribute, please see https://github.com/rxwei/swift-evolution/blob/autodiff/proposals/0000-differentiable-programming.md#derivative-attribute.

Author: ```suggestion
For usage examples of the `@derivative` attribute, refer to the [`@derivative` attribute section](https://github.com/rxwei/swift-evolution/blob/autodiff/proposals/0000-differentiable-programming.md#derivative-attribute) in the proposal.
```

Author: Is this okay now?

Reviewer: Yes. Thanks.

# Swift Differentiable Programming Implementation Overview

> - Authors: [Dan Zheng](https://github.com/dan-zheng), [Bart Chrzaszcz](https://github.com/bartchr808), [Philip Turner](https://github.com/philipturner)

Reviewer 2: Have you made extensive changes to the document that from the original document?   I'm asking as you are marking yourself as an author, and I'd like to understand what the difference is from the original document being converted.

Author: Look at my PR to swift-apis (hyperlinked in the first comment to this PR). I outlined 5 changes I made to the original document. @compnerd please look over the other 4 and validate them.

Reviewer: We really appreciate your contribution to this document, but the authorship in this document was meant to reflect substantial _technical_ contribution from years of design and development in addition to just writing.  As a result, I believe it's more appropriate to keep the original author list.  Be assured that your contribution will still be acknowledged, regardless of being listed as an author in the document.  Thanks!

Author: ```suggestion
- Authors: [Dan Zheng](https://github.com/dan-zheng), [Bart Chrzaszcz](https://github.com/bartchr808)
```

The generated differential function takes the partial derivative with respect to inputs and returns the partial derivative with respect to the output. There is a mapping between active values in the original function and their tangent values (i.e. partial derivatives) in the differential function. The differential captures the "callee differentials" from the JVP, and replaces original function applications using original values with "callee differential" applications using tangent values.

Finally, the JVP returns a tuple of the original result and the generated differential function.

```swift
// JVP: replaces all function applications with JVP applications.
sil @jvp_f : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {
bb0(%x):
  (%y1, %df_sin) = apply @jvp_sin(%x)
  (%y2, %df_cos) = apply @jvp_cos(%x)
  (%y3, %df_mul) = apply @jvp_mul(%y1, %y2)
  // Return tuple of original result and differential.
  return (%y3, { %dx in
    %dy1 = apply %df_sin(%dx)
    %dy2 = apply %df_cos(%dx)
    %dy3 = apply %df_mul(%dy1, %dy2)
    return %dy3
  })
}
```

### Visiting the original function to create a JVP

> In the Swift compiler, we have a class called [`JVPEmitter`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/lib/SILOptimizer/Mandatory/Differentiation.cpp) which subclasses [`TypeSubstCloner`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/include/swift/SIL/TypeSubstCloner.h). This uses the [visitor pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern) to visit the original function and generate the JVP function. Taking a look at the `JVPEmitter` class, there are methods like `visitApplyInst`, `visitStructExtractInst`, etc. Each of these methods visit an instruction that is important in the generation of the JVP and differential, and emits a newly mapped version. We handle each type of instruction differently, explained below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Swift compiler, we have a class called [`JVPCloner`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/include/swift/SILOptimizer/Differentiation/JVPCloner.h) which subclasses [`TypeSubstCloner`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/include/swift/SIL/TypeSubstCloner.h). This uses the [visitor pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern) to visit the original function and generate the JVP function. Taking a look at the `JVPCloner` class, there are methods like `visitApplyInst`, `visitStructExtractInst`, etc. Each of these methods visit an instruction that is important in the generation of the JVP and differential, and emits a newly mapped version. We handle each type of instruction differently, explained below.
```

This expects a fair understanding of C++ as I assume that the reader will understand the PIMPL pattern and how it applies to this.

### SIL generation

`@differentiable` declaration attributes are lowered to SIL differentiability witnesses. SIL differentiability witnesses have similar components to `@differentiable` attributes, including parameter indices, result indices (a SIL implementation detail), JVP/VJP SIL function names, and an optional generic where clause.

### Differentiation transform

The differentiation transform canonicalizes SIL differentiability witnesses: all SIL differentiability witnesses are filled in with JVP/VJP functions.

```swift
// Before: empty differentiability witness, lowered from a `@differentiable`
// declaration attribute.

// differentiability witness for foo(_:)
sil_differentiability_witness hidden [parameters 0] [results 0] @$s12diff_witness3fooyS2fF : $@convention(thin) (Float) -> Float {
}

// After: canonicalized differentiability witness. The differentiation transform
// fills in JVP/VJP functions.

sil_differentiability_witness hidden [parameters 0] [results 0] @$s3fooAAyS2fF : $@convention(thin) (Float) -> Float {
  jvp: @AD__$s3fooAAyS2fF__jvp_src_0_wrt_0 : $@convention(thin) (Float) -> (Float, @owned @callee_guaranteed (Float) -> Float)

>   vjp: @AD__$s3fooAAyS2fF__vjp_src_0_wrt_0 : $@convention(thin) (Float) -> (Float, @owned @callee_guaranteed (Float) -> Float)

Reviewer: Note that these symbols are no longer mangled this way.  We should start a separate patch and update these function names. You can write a simple program with `foo(_:)`, compile with `swiftc -emit-sil` and find its JVP and VJP's mangled names in the corresponding differentiability witness.

Author: I will leave that up to you, as I am not that familiar with the compiler yet.

Author: @rxwei Also, I need to import the Differentiation package to make the code compile. This means I can only compile it in Xcode, not in the command line (without more knowledge of the compiler). If you have a development toolchain installed, then you might have better luck with it.

Reviewer: `_Differentiation` is always included in development toolchains. You just need to import `_Differentiation`. That works with command line as well.

Reviewer 2: @rxwei awesome!  The decoration scheme was something that really bothered me.  Is the current scheme documented?

Reviewer: Everything's documented in https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/ABI/Mangling.rst (search for "autodiff" and "differentiable").

Author: <img width="1257" alt="Screen Shot 2021-12-07 at 8 06 00 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71743241/145130139-f36af3e6-5680-4648-a59d-d9de3bd67c0c.png">

I don't have a development toolchain configured. If it's not too much to ask, could @compnerd or @rxwei fix the names?

Reviewer: You don't need to fix the names to merge this PR.  We can do it later.

    print(result)
    return result
}
```

Activity analysis classifies values in a function into these categories:
- **Varied values**: values that depend on the input.
- **Useful values**: values that contribute to the output.
- **Active values**: values are both varied and useful. These are the values that need a derivative.

Here is the result of activity analysis for this example:

```swift
// Varied values are in all caps.
// These values depend on the input (`x`).
@differentiable
func f(_ X: Float) -> Float {
    let SINX = sin(X)
    let cos3 = cos(3)
    let RESULT = SINX * cos3
    print(RESULT)
    return RESULT
}

// Useful values are in all caps.
// These values contribute to the output (`result`).
@differentiable
func f(_ X: Float) -> Float {
    let SINX = sin(X)
    let COS3 = cos(3) // 3 should be treated as if capitalized.
    let RESULT = SINX * COS3
    print(RESULT)
    return RESULT
}

// Active values are in all caps.
// These values are varied and useful, and thus need a derivative.
@differentiable
func f(_ X: Float) -> Float {
    let SINX = sin(X)
    let cos3 = cos(3)
    let RESULT = SINX * cos3
    let void = print(result)
    return RESULT

> }

Reviewer: All caps are a bit hard to read. Can you use a pair of `*` to highlight things?  That wouldn't make it compile but it would convey information more clearly for the purpose of this section.

Author: ```suggestion
// Varied values are surrounded by asterisks.
// These values depend on the input (`x`).
@differentiable
func f(_ **x**: Float) -> Float {
    let **sinx** = sin(**x**)
    let cos3 = cos(3)
    let **result** = **sinx** * cos3
    print(**result**)
    return **result**
}

// Useful values are surrounded by asterisks.
// These values contribute to the output (`result`).
@differentiable
func f(_ **x**: Float) -> Float {
    let **sinx** = sin(**x**)
    let **cos3** = cos(**3**)
    let **result** = **sinx** * **cos3**
    print(**result**)
    return **result**
}

// Active values are surrounded by asterisks.
// These values are varied and useful, and thus need a derivative.
@differentiable
func f(_ **x**: Float) -> Float {
    let **sinx** = sin(**x**)
    let cos3 = cos(3)
    let **result** = **sinx** * cos3
    let void = print(**result**)
    return **result**
}
```

Author: ```suggestion
// Varied values are surrounded by asterisks.
// These values depend on the input (`x`).
@differentiable
func f(_ **x**: Float) -> Float {
    let **sinx** = sin(**x**)
    let cos3 = cos(3)
    let **result** = **sinx** * cos3
    print(**result**)
    return **result**
}

// Useful values are surrounded by asterisks.
// These values contribute to the output (`result`).
@differentiable
func f(_ **x**: Float) -> Float {
    let **sinx** = sin(**x**)
    let **cos3** = cos(**3**)
    let **result** = **sinx** * **cos3**
    print(**result**)
    return **result**
}

// Active values are surrounded by asterisks.
// These values are varied and useful, and thus need a derivative.
@differentiable
func f(_ **x**: Float) -> Float {
    let **sinx** = sin(**x**)
    let cos3 = cos(3)
    let **result** = **sinx** * cos3
    let void = print(**result**)
    return **result**
}
```

}
struct StructBB1 {
  var diff_g: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  var succ: EnumBB1 { get set }
}
struct StructBB2 {
  var diff_h: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  var succ: EnumBB2 { get set }
}
struct StructBB3 {
  var diff_j: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  // No successor.
}
```

So now, this differential struct is a nested data structure, which consists of a dynamic data structure that represents the basic blocks we visited and the derivative-affecting functions we need to call.

Another additional transformation that is done in the JVP is the creation of trampoline blocks. These are basic blocks which deal with handling the transition from one basic block to another, specifically regarding the differential structs. For a concrete example, we would roughly have the following SIL code for the control flow function above:

> NOTE: The SIL code below is simplified in both naming and how each instruction looks like. For more information regarding how each instruction looks like in actual code, refer to [SIL.rst](SIL.rst).

```swift
func m(_ x: Float) -> Float {
  var retVal = f(x)
  if x < 5 {
    retVal = g(retVal)
  } else {
    retVal = h(retVal)
  }
  return j(retVal)
}

> bb0(args…):

Reviewer: Let's replace all `…` with `...`.

Author: Done

  %4 = alloc_stack $Float                         // users: %7, %6, %5
  %5 = apply %1(%4, %2) : $@callee_guaranteed (@in_guaranteed Float) -> @out Float
  %6 = load [trivial] %4 : $*Float                // user: %9
  dealloc_stack %4 : $*Float                      // id: %7
  dealloc_stack %2 : $*Float                      // id: %8
  return %6 : $Float                              // id: %9
} // end sil function '$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR'
```

Notice `%6 = differentiable_function [parameters 0] %5` in `@main`: this triggers the differentiation transform. The differentiation transform does the following:
- Attempts to canonicalize `%6 = differentiable_function [parameters 0] %5`. This starts by finding the underlying referenced original function.
- Peers through `partial_apply` to find `%4 = function_ref @$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR` as the underlying original function (a reabstraction thunk).
- Generates derivative functions for the reabstraction thunk. This succeeds; the VJP is below:

```swift
// AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR__vjp_src_0_wrt_0
sil hidden [serializable] [ossa] @AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR__vjp_src_0_wrt_0 : $@conven

> tion(thin) (Float, @guaranteed @callee_guaranteed (@in_guaranteed Float) -> @out Float)

Reviewer: These should be one line.

Author: ```suggestion
sil hidden [serializable] [ossa] @AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR__vjp_src_0_wrt_0 : $@convention(thin) (Float, @guaranteed @callee_guaranteed (@in_guaranteed Float) -> @out Float)
```

-> (Float, @owned @callee_guaranteed (Float) -> Float) {
// %0                                             // user: %3
// %1                                             // user: %5
bb0(%0 : $Float, %1 : @guaranteed $@callee_guaranteed (@in_guaranteed Float) -> @out Flo

> at):

Reviewer: One line here

Author: ```suggestion
bb0(%0 : $Float, %1 : @guaranteed $@callee_guaranteed (@in_guaranteed Float) -> @out Float):
```

- [Differentiable function types](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#differentiable-function-types): subtypes of normal function types, with a different runtime representation and calling convention. Differentiable function types have differentiable parameters and results.
- [Differential operators](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#differential-operators): core differentiation APIs. Differential operators are higher-order functions that take `@differentiable` functions as inputs and return derivative functions or evaluate derivative values.
- [The differentiation transform](#the-differentiation-transform): a compiler transformation on the Swift Intermediate Language (SIL) that implements automatic differentiation and generates derivative functions. The differentiation transform is explained in this document.

## Terminology

### JVP and VJP functions

> A JVP (Jacobian-vector products) function is a forward-mode derivative function. A VJP (vector-Jacobian products) function is a reverse-mode derivative function.

Author: That seems like a good idea. @dan-zheng could you do this definition?

> A JVP (Jacobian-vector products) function is a forward-mode derivative function. A VJP (vector-Jacobian products) function is a reverse-mode derivative function.

Reviewer: You can add links to the manifesto: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#history-of-differentiation-algorithms.

> A JVP (Jacobian-vector products) function is a forward-mode derivative function. A VJP (vector-Jacobian products) function is a reverse-mode derivative function.

Author: ```suggestion
A JVP (Jacobian-vector product) function is a [forward-mode](DifferentiableProgramming.md#automatic-differentiation) derivative function. A VJP (vector-Jacobian product) function is a [reverse-mode](DifferentiableProgramming.md#automatic-differentiation) derivative function.
```

> A JVP (Jacobian-vector products) function is a forward-mode derivative function. A VJP (vector-Jacobian products) function is a reverse-mode derivative function.

Author: Waiting for your opinion on changing from plural to singular before committing.

> A JVP (Jacobian-vector products) function is a forward-mode derivative function. A VJP (vector-Jacobian products) function is a reverse-mode derivative function.

Reviewer: LGTM

### Typing rules

Consider a function with type `(T0, ...) -> U`, where `T0, ..., U` all conform to the `Differentiable` protocol.

The JVP function type is:

```swift
//  (T0, ...)      ->  (U,    (T0.TangentVector, ...) -> (U.TangentVector))
//   ^                  ^      ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~      ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
//  original args   result      derivative wrt args    derivative wrt result
```

The JVP function returns a tuple with two elements:
- The original result of type `U`.
- A linear approximation function called the “differential”, which takes derivatives with respect to arguments and returns the derivative with respect to the result.

The VJP function type is:

```swift
//  (T0, ...)      ->  (U,    (U.TangentVector)   -> (T0.TangentVector, ...))
//   ^                  ^      ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~        ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
//  original args   result     derivative wrt result    derivative wrt args
```

The VJP function returns a tuple with two elements:
- The original result of type `U`.

> - A backpropagation function called the “pullback”, which takes the derivatives with respect to the result and returns the derivative with respect to arguments.

Author: In the [wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backpropagation), there is no dash.

> - A backpropagation function called the “pullback”, which takes the derivatives with respect to the result and returns the derivative with respect to arguments.

Reviewer 2: Ah, weird, seems fine then.

> TODO: Explain typing rules for functions with `inout` parameters.

### Registration

JVP and VJP functions can be registered using the `@derivative` attribute. JVP functions should return a tuple with labels `(value: ..., differential: ...)`. VJP functions should return a tuple with labels `(value: ..., pullback: ...)`.

For usage examples of the `@derivative` attribute, please see:

> - [The custom differentiation tutorial](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift/blob/master/docs/site/tutorials/custom_differentiation.ipynb), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `e^x`.

Author: I was thinking of eventually turning the tutorial into DocC (see the issue "requesting assistance" on [tensorflow/swift-apis](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift-apis)). However, we can make something else in Markdown for the time being.

> - [The custom differentiation tutorial](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift/blob/master/docs/site/tutorials/custom_differentiation.ipynb), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `e^x`.

Author: ```suggestion
- [The custom differentiation tutorial](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift/blob/main/docs/site/tutorials/custom_differentiation.ipynb), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `e^x`.
```

> - [The custom differentiation tutorial](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift/blob/master/docs/site/tutorials/custom_differentiation.ipynb), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `e^x`.

Author: Overhauling the tutorial right now would waste more time than any of us can afford. We should leave that task and any changes to the Colab notebooks until we've made a concrete decision of what will become of them.

> - [The custom differentiation tutorial](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift/blob/master/docs/site/tutorials/custom_differentiation.ipynb), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `e^x`.

Reviewer 2: The colab notebooks are no longer useful and we should just drop this if it is not possible to convert.  The colab environment currently does not have the swift integration available.

> - [The custom differentiation tutorial](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift/blob/master/docs/site/tutorials/custom_differentiation.ipynb), which shows how to use the `@derivative` attribute to register a derivative for `e^x`.

Author: I removed the Jupyter notebook link and merged the remaining bulleted list element into one sentence. Please review the wording.

> TODO: Write a canonical explanation of JVP and VJP functions and a `@derivative` attribute usage guide.

## Background

### The Swift compilation pipeline

The Swift compiler translates Swift source code into executable machine code. Below is an illustration of the compilation pipeline:

![Diagram of the Swift compilation pipeline](./assets/DifferentiableProgrammingImplementation/swift-compilation-pipeline.png)

Here is a description of the main phases in compilation:[†](https://www.swift.org/swift-compiler/)
- **Parsing**: The parser takes Swift source code and generates an abstract syntax tree (AST) without type information. Warnings and errors are produced for grammatical problems in source code.
- **Type checking**: The type checker takes the parsed AST and transforms it into a fully type-checked form, performing type inference. Warnings and errors are produced for semantic problems in source code.

> - **SIL generation**: The Swift Intermediate Language (SIL) is a high-level intermediate language for Swift suitable for analysis and optimization. The SIL generation phase lowers the type-checked AST into “raw” SIL.

Author: Could you provide a specific link in an additional requested change then?

> - **SIL generation**: The Swift Intermediate Language (SIL) is a high-level intermediate language for Swift suitable for analysis and optimization. The SIL generation phase lowers the type-checked AST into “raw” SIL.

Reviewer: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/SIL.rst#silgen

> - **SIL generation**: The Swift Intermediate Language (SIL) is a high-level intermediate language for Swift suitable for analysis and optimization. The SIL generation phase lowers the type-checked AST into “raw” SIL.

Author: ```suggestion
- **SIL generation**: The Swift Intermediate Language (SIL) is a high-level intermediate language for Swift suitable for analysis and optimization. The SIL generation phase lowers the type-checked AST into ["raw" SIL](SIL.rst#silgen).
```

> - **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and transformations that affect program correctness, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining. The result is “canonical” SIL.

Author: I'll approve the quotation change after we get @dan-zheng or @rxwei's feedback.

> - **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and transformations that affect program correctness, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining. The result is “canonical” SIL.

Reviewer: Yeah, "program correctness" is incorrect. It should say something like: 
> The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses that diagnose user errors and lowering to canonical SIL.

> - **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and transformations that affect program correctness, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining. The result is “canonical” SIL.

Reviewer: The commit change (below) was incorrect.
> The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses that diagnose user errors and lower to "canonical" SIL, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining.

It's not analyses that lower to canonical SIL. Rather, the SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and _lowering_. That's why I suggested "lowering". Better suggestions are welcome of course.

> - **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and transformations that affect program correctness, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining. The result is “canonical” SIL.

Author: Could you clarify what you want using the suggested change mechanism?

> - **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and transformations that affect program correctness, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining. The result is “canonical” SIL.

Author: I had a simple misunderstanding of grammatical intention (lowering vs. lower). Could you just show the changes you're asking for using the suggested change mechanism.

> - **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses and transformations that affect program correctness, including data flow diagnostics and mandatory inlining. The result is “canonical” SIL.

Reviewer: It's essentially the suggestion in the previous comment (https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/40443#discussion_r764331712).

```suggestion
- **SIL mandatory passes**: The SIL mandatory passes perform analyses (diagnosing user errors) and lowering (down to canonical SIL).
```

The generated differential function takes the partial derivative with respect to inputs and returns the partial derivative with respect to the output. There is a mapping between active values in the original function and their tangent values (i.e. partial derivatives) in the differential function. The differential captures the “callee differentials” from the JVP, and replaces original function applications using original values with “callee differential” applications using tangent values.

Finally, the JVP returns a tuple of the original result and the generated differential function.

```swift
// JVP: replaces all function applications with JVP applications.
sil @jvp_foo : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {
bb0(%x):
  (%y1, %df_sin) = apply @jvp_sin(%x)
  (%y2, %df_cos) = apply @jvp_cos(%x)
  (%y3, %df_mul) = apply @jvp_mul(%y1, %y2)
  // Return tuple of original result and differential.
  return (%y3, { %dx in
    %dy1 = apply %df_sin(%dx)
    %dy2 = apply %df_cos(%dx)
    %dy3 = apply %df_mul(%dy1, %dy2)
    return %dy3
  })
}
```

### Visiting the original function to create a JVP

> In the Swift compiler, we have a class called [`JVPEmitter`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/tensorflow/lib/SILOptimizer/Mandatory/Differentiation.cpp) which subclasses [`TypeSubstCloner`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/include/swift/SIL/TypeSubstCloner.h). This uses the [visitor pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern) to visit the original function and generate the JVP function. Taking a look at the `JVPEmitter` class, there are methods like `visitApplyInst`, `visitStructExtractInst`, etc. Each of these methods visit an instruction that is important in the generation of the JVP and differential, and emits a newly mapped version. We handle each type of instruction differently, explained below.

Reviewer 2: This is out of date with the current state of main.  I think that we should not be referencing anything on the tensorflow branch.

Author: Could you replace the link with the correct one then?
```suggestion
In the Swift compiler, we have a class called [`JVPEmitter`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/lib/SILOptimizer/Mandatory/Differentiation.cpp) which subclasses [`TypeSubstCloner`](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/include/swift/SIL/TypeSubstCloner.h). This uses the [visitor pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern) to visit the original function and generate the JVP function. Taking a look at the `JVPEmitter` class, there are methods like `visitApplyInst`, `visitStructExtractInst`, etc. Each of these methods visit an instruction that is important in the generation of the JVP and differential, and emits a newly mapped version. We handle each type of instruction differently, explained below.
```

One important note is that in the JVP, we visit every single instruction in the original function - sometimes it’s an exact copy, and other times there is some special logic we wrote to handle it differently (e.g. like control-flow discussed below). This is so that the JVP function behaves just like the original function. With this, if the original function has a print statement, the JVP will as well. However, when we consider the differential, we will only transform SIL instructions from the original that we deem to be fit (so no print statement in the differential!). These instructions are those that should be differentiated, which uses the activity analysis calculated earlier to determine which SIL instructions are important in computing the tangent values of a function. 

> In Swift code, the generated differential function can be written as a closure, capturing the “callee differentials” from the JVP. But in SIL, all functions are top-level; closures are represented as top-level functions with captured values as an explicit argument. This requires a differential struct which will be discussed in the next section. What’s important here is that the `JVPEmitter` emits code both in a top level JVP function, but also a corresponding top level differential function.

Reviewer 2: Again, this does not match the current state.

```suggestion
In Swift code, the generated differential function can be written as a closure, capturing the "callee differentials" from the JVP. But in SIL, all functions are top-level; closures are represented as top-level functions with captured values as an explicit argument. This requires a differential struct which will be discussed in the next section. What’s important here is that the `JVPEmitter` emits code both in a top level JVP function, but also a corresponding top level differential function.
```

Author: What changes must be made to this text then? (aside from the quotation correction)

Reviewer 2: There is no `JVPEmitter`, so what actually generates that?  This largely impacts the last sentence.

Author: @dan-zheng could you patch this sentence since you know the most about this?

Reviewer: It's been renamed to `JVPCloner`.

Author: ```suggestion
In Swift code, the generated differential function can be written as a closure, capturing the "callee differentials" from the JVP. But in SIL, all functions are top-level; closures are represented as top-level functions with captured values as an explicit argument. This requires a differential struct which will be discussed in the next section. What’s important here is that the `JVPCloner` emits code both in a top level JVP function, but also a corresponding top level differential function.
```

Here is what the more accurate, closure-free SIL pseudocode looks like:

```swift
// Struct containing differential functions.

> // Partially-applied to `@df_foo` in `@jvp_foo`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Partially-applied to `@df_f` in `@jvp_f`.
```

> struct foo_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0 {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
struct f_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0 {
```

  var df_sin: (Float) -> Float
  var df_cos: (Float) -> Float
  var df_mul: (Float, Float) -> Float
}

// JVP: replaces all function applications with JVP applications.

> sil @jvp_foo : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sil @jvp_f : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {
```

bb0(%x):
  (%y1, %df_sin) = apply @jvp_sin(%x)
  (%y2, %df_cos) = apply @jvp_cos(%x)
  (%y3, %df_mul) = apply @jvp_mul(%y1, %y2)
  // Partially-apply to get a differential.

>   %df_struct = struct $foo_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0 (%df_sin, %df_cos, %df_mul)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  %df_struct = struct $f_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0 (%df_sin, %df_cos, %df_mul)
```

>   %df = partial_apply @df_foo(%df_struct)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  %df = partial_apply @df_f(%df_struct)
```

  // Return tuple of original result and differential.
  %result = tuple (%y3, %df)
  return %result
}

// Differential: apply differentials to tangent values.

> sil @df_foo : $(Float, foo_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0) -> (Float) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sil @df_f : $(Float, f_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0) -> (Float) {
```

bb0(%dx, %df_struct):
  %df_sin = struct_extract %df_struct, #df_sin
  %dy1 = apply %df_sin(%dx)
  %df_cos = struct_extract %df_struct, #df_cos
  %dy2 = apply %df_cos(%dx)
  %df_mul = struct_extract %df_struct, #df_mul
  %dy3 = apply %df_mul(%dy1, %dy2)
  return %dy3
}
```

### Differential struct creation

> To dive deeper into the differential struct, the reason why we need these “callee differentials” is that not all differentials are linear, so they capture some sort of “state” from the original function call. For example, in multiplication, the differential is `dx * y + dy * x`. In the differential function, we don’t have access to the values of `x` and `y` - only `dx` and `dy`. Additionally, in the JVP call, the differential function it returned would have copied these values into the function so we only have `dx` and `dy`. So if we called the function with `x = 4`, `y = 5`, the differential would be `5 * dx + 4 * dy`. Thus, we need to pass these callee differentials into the overall/new differential function we generate by taking an additional “differential struct” argument, which represents a bundle of all of the “captured callee differentials”. The JVP then constructs an instance of the “differential struct” and [partially applies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_application) them to the generated differential to get a differential value which it returns as part of the (original, diff) tuple in the JVP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To dive deeper into the differential struct, the reason why we need these "callee differentials" is that not all differentials are linear, so they capture some sort of "state" from the original function call. For example, in multiplication, the differential is `dx * y + dy * x`. In the differential function, we don’t have access to the values of `x` and `y` - only `dx` and `dy`. Additionally, in the JVP call, the differential function it returned would have copied these values into the function so we only have `dx` and `dy`. So if we called the function with `x = 4`, `y = 5`, the differential would be `5 * dx + 4 * dy`. Thus, we need to pass these callee differentials into the overall/new differential function we generate by taking an additional "differential struct" argument, which represents a bundle of all of the "captured callee differentials". The JVP then constructs an instance of the "differential struct" and [partially applies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_application) them to the generated differential to get a differential value which it returns as part of the (original, diff) tuple in the JVP.
```

These structs consist of two different types of values: the differential function that maps to the original function call which we got from the second element of the JVP call, and also branching enums.

> In order to define the differential struct type, we preemptively go over the entire function we are going to differentiate in order to generate the struct. Using the same approach as with `JVPEmitter` when emitting code in the differential, we visit all instructions that we deem are needed to take the derivative of. We then calculate the expected differential type of the function, and add that as a field to the struct.

Reviewer 2: Please remove the reference to the `JVPEmitter`.

```suggestion
In order to define the differential struct type, we preemptively go over the entire function we are going to differentiate in order to generate the struct. When emitting code in the differential we visit all instructions that we deem are needed to take the derivative of the function. We then calculate the expected differential type of the function, and add that as a field to the struct.
```

```swift

> func foo(_ x: Float) -> Float {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func f(_ x: Float) -> Float {
```

  let a = sin(x)
  return 2 * x // only active in one result!
}

> struct foo_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0 {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
struct f_bb0_DF_src_0_wrt_0 {
```

  var df_sin: (Float) -> Float
  var df_mul: (Float) -> Float
}
```

In order to handle control flow, we need to create a struct for each basic block. In addition to this, we need an enum field that has the successor basic block struct as a payload value on the enum case. The reason this is required is that control flow is dynamic and what route we take down the control flow is determined during runtime. As such, we need to dynamically create instances of these structs, and be able to handle every control flow path. For example:

```swift

> func bar(_ x: Float) -> Float {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func m(_ x: Float) -> Float {
```

```swift
enum EnumBB0 {
  case BB1(StructBB1)
  case BB2(StructBB2)
}
enum EnumBB1 {
  case BB3(StructBB3)
}
enum EnumBB2 {
  case BB3(StructBB3)
}
```

With the following structs:

```swift
struct StructBB0 {
  var diff_f: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  var succ: EnumBB0 { get set }
}
struct StructBB1 {
  var diff_g: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  var succ: EnumBB1 { get set }
}
struct StructBB2 {
  var diff_h: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  var succ: EnumBB2 { get set }
}
struct StructBB3 {
  var diff_j: (Float) -> (Float) { get set }
  // No successor.
}
```

So now, this differential struct is a nested data structure, which consists of a dynamic data structure that represents the basic blocks we visited and the derivative-affecting functions we need to call.

Another additional transformation that is done in the JVP is the creation of trampoline blocks. These are basic blocks which deal with handling the transition from one basic block to another, specifically regarding the differential structs. For a concrete example, we would roughly have the following SIL code for the control flow function above:

> > NOTE: The SIL code below is simplified in both naming and how each instruction looks like. For more information regarding how each instruction looks like in actual code, refer to [SIL.rst](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/tensorflow/docs/SIL.rst).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> NOTE: The SIL code below is simplified in both naming and how each instruction looks like. For more information regarding how each instruction looks like in actual code, refer to [SIL.rst](SIL.rst).
```

```swift

> func bar(_ x: Float) -> Float {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func m(_ x: Float) -> Float {
```

  %55 = enum $EnumBB2, #EnumBB2.BB3!enumelt.1, undef : $StructBB3 // bb2 succ inst.
  // get bb2 succ address from inside bb0.
  %succ_addr = struct_element_addr %bb2_payload_ptr : $*StructBB2, #StructBB2.succ
  // store the memory alloc’d struct to the succ field in bb0.
  store %succ_addr to %bb2_payload_ptr
  // Get a pointer to the memory of the field (the payload).
  %bb3_payload_addr = init_enum_data_addr %succ_addr.BB3
  // Can’t pass addresses to basic blocks, need to convert to pointer.
  %bb3_payload_ptr = address_to_pointer %bb3_payload_addr
  br bb3(args…, %bb3_payload_ptr)

bb3(args…, %bb3_payload_ptr):
  // %diff_func_j is the differential of `j` gotten from a JVP call earlier in the 
  // basic block code.
  %bb3_diff_field = struct_element_addr %bb3_payload_ptr.diff_j
  store %diff_func_j to %bb3_diff_field // store diff func.
  // Get the differential of bar and partially apply the struct to it so it can call
  // the correct differentials in its body.
  %diff_bar_instance = partial_apply diff_bar_func(%bb0_struct)
  // %orig_result came from the same instruction where we got %diff_func
  return (%orig_result, %diff_bar_instance)
```

> - Here we do the same thing as we have been doing, which is partially applying the overall bb0 struct we created in bb0:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Here we do the same thing as we have been doing, which is partially applying the overall `StructBB0` struct we created in basic block 0:
```

    - `%bb0_struct = alloc_stack $StructBB0`

>         - This has the nested differential structs for all other relevant differential structs for all other basics blocks, and we partially apply it for the differential of `bar` and return the original result + differential tuple pair

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - This has the nested differential structs for all other relevant differential structs for all other basics blocks, and we partially apply it for the differential of `m` and return the original result and differential tuple pair
```

## VJP and pullback generation

> Similar to generated JVP functions, generated VJP functions are clones of the original function, with function applications replaced with VJP applications. Each VJP application returns the original result of application in addition to a pullback value (named “callee pullback” to distinguish it from the “generated pullback function”).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to generated JVP functions, generated VJP functions are clones of the original function, with function applications replaced with VJP applications. Each VJP application returns the original result of application in addition to a pullback value (named "callee pullback" to distinguish it from the "generated pullback function").
```

> The generated pullback function takes the partial derivatives with respect to outputs and returns the partial derivative with respect to the input. There is a mapping between _active values in the original function_ and their _adjoint values (i.e. partial derivatives) in the pullback function_. The pullback captures the “callee pullbacks” from the VJP, and replaces _original function applications using original values_ with _“callee pullback” applications using adjoint values_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The generated pullback function takes the partial derivatives with respect to outputs and returns the partial derivative with respect to the input. There is a mapping between _active values in the original function_ and their _adjoint values (i.e. partial derivatives) in the pullback function_. The pullback captures the "callee pullbacks" from the VJP, and replaces _original function applications using original values_ with _"callee pullback" applications using adjoint values_.
```

Finally, the VJP returns a tuple of the original result and the generated pullback function.

```swift
// VJP: replaces all function applications with VJP applications.

> sil @vjp_foo : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sil @vjp_f : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {
```

bb0(%x):
  (%y1, %pb_sin) = apply @vjp_sin(%x)
  (%y2, %pb_cos) = apply @vjp_cos(%x)
  (%y3, %pb_mul) = apply @vjp_mul(%y1, %y2)
  // Return tuple of original result and pullback.
  return (%y3, { %dy3 in
    // All "adjoint values" in the pullback are zero-initialized.
    // %dx = 0, %dy1 = 0, %dy2 = 0
    (%dy1, %dy2) += %pb_mul(%dy3)
    (%dx) += %pb_cos(%dy2)
    (%dx) += %pb_sin(%dy1)
    return %dx
  })
}

// VJP: replaces all function applications with VJP applications.

> sil @vjp_foo : $(Float) -> (Float) -> Float {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sil @vjp_f : $(Float) -> (Float) -> Float {
```

bb0(%x):
  (%pb_sin) = apply @vjp_sin(%x)
  (%pb_cos) = apply @vjp_cos(%x)
  (%pb_mul) = apply @vjp_mul(%y1, %y2)
  // Return tuple of original result and pullback.
  return (%y3, { %dy3 in
    // All "adjoint values" in the pullback are zero-initialized.
    // %dx = 0, %dy1 = 0, %dy2 = 0
    (%dy1, %dy2) += %pb_mul(%dy3)
    (%dx) += %pb_cos(%dy2)
    (%dx) += %pb_sin(%dy1)
    return %dx
  })
}
```

> As explained above in the “JVP and differential generation” section, closures do not exist in SIL. A more accurate, closure-free pseudocode looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As explained above in the "JVP and differential generation" section, closures do not exist in SIL. A more accurate, closure-free pseudocode looks like:
```

```swift
// Struct containing pullback functions.

> // Partially-applied to `@pb_foo` in `@vjp_foo`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Partially-applied to `@pb_f` in `@vjp_f`.
```

> struct foo_bb0_PB_src_0_wrt_0 {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
struct f_bb0_PB_src_0_wrt_0 {
```

  let pb_sin: (Float) -> Float
  let pb_cos: (Float) -> Float
  let pb_mul: (Float) -> (Float, Float)
}

// VJP: replaces all function applications with VJP applications.

> sil @vjp_foo : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sil @vjp_f : $(Float) -> (Float, (Float) -> Float) {
```

bb0(%x):
  (%y1, %pb_sin) = apply @vjp_sin(%x)
  (%y2, %pb_cos) = apply @vjp_cos(%x)
  (%y3, %pb_mul) = apply @vjp_mul(%y1, %y2)
  // Partially-apply to get a pullback.

>   %pb_struct = struct $foo_bb0_PB_src_0_wrt_0 (%pb_sin, %pb_cos, %pb_mul)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  %pb_struct = struct $f_bb0_PB_src_0_wrt_0 (%pb_sin, %pb_cos, %pb_mul)
```

>   %pb = partial_apply @pb_foo(%pb_struct)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  %pb = partial_apply @pb_f(%pb_struct)
```

  // Return tuple of original result and pullback.
  %result = tuple (%y3, %pb)
  return %result
}

// Pullback: apply pullbacks to adjoint values.

> sil @pb_foo : $(Float, foo_bb0_PB_src_0_wrt_0) -> (Float) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sil @pb_f : $(Float, f_bb0_PB_src_0_wrt_0) -> (Float) {
```

bb0(%dy3, %pb_struct):
  // All "adjoint values" in the pullback are zero-initialized.
  // %dx = 0, %dy1 = 0, %dy2 = 0
  %pb_mul = struct_extract %pb_struct, #pb_mul
  (%dy1, %dy2) += %pb_mul(%dy3)
  %pb_cos = struct_extract %pb_struct, #pb_cos
  (%dx) += %pb_cos(%dy2)
  %pb_sin = struct_extract %pb_struct, #pb_sin
  (%dx) += %pb_sin(%dy1)
  return %dx
}
```

## Derivative code generation details

> The sections above explain derivative code generation, focusing on the transformation rules for function applications (i.e. the `apply` instruction). However, SIL functions are often more complex than just “a single basic block of function applications”:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sections above explain derivative code generation, focusing on the transformation rules for function applications (i.e. the `apply` instruction). However, SIL functions are often more complex than just "a single basic block of function applications":
```

- Original functions may involve control flow (conditionals, loops, `guard` and `switch` statements, etc) to express conditional operations. Such functions in SIL have multiple basic blocks and control-flow-related instructions.

Multiple basic blocks and control flow basic block terminators (`cond_br`, `switch_enum`, etc) require special derivative code generation rules.

> > TODO: **Explain the control flow differentiation approach.** The approach is novel and highly worth documenting. [See “Control Flow Differentiation” slides](https://drive.google.com/corp/drive/folders/1y1FeJenXhoz_8xPw0ftVPngJUO_MdmRX) for an overview.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> TODO: **Explain the control flow differentiation approach.** The approach is novel and highly worth documenting. [See "Control Flow Differentiation" slides](https://drive.google.com/corp/drive/folders/1y1FeJenXhoz_8xPw0ftVPngJUO_MdmRX) for an overview.
```

> - Original functions may have instructions other than `apply`. This includes the entire SIL [instruction set](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/docs/SIL.rst#instruction-set):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Original functions may have instructions other than `apply`. This includes the entire SIL [instruction set](SIL.rst#instruction-set):
```

    - Memory-related operations: `alloc_stack`, `dealloc_stack`, `load`, `store`, etc.
    - Aggregate operations: `struct`, `tuple`, `enum`.
    - Projections: `struct_extract`, `tuple_extract`, `struct_element_addr`, `tuple_element_addr`.

> Many of these instructions have well-defined corresponding tangent instructions (for the differential) and adjoint instructions (for the pullback). It turns out that supporting transformations of a few common instructions is sufficient for many use cases (e.g. [deep learning APIs](https://github.com/tensorflow/swift-apis)). Here is a short table listing some of these instruction transformation rules:

Reviewer 2: I'm kinda torn on this.  While the example of the swift-apis is useful, I think it might be better to remove the reference for now.

Author: Are you open to adding the reference back in when swift-apis becomes active again? We could also reference @ProfFan's SwiftFusion.

Reviewer 2: I'd rather try to keep the links to the Swift projects.  If swift-apis becomes extremely active due to the community pushing it forward, perhaps that would be reasonable then.

Author: Could you clarify which choice you want? Keep as is or replace?

Reviewer: I agree with @compnerd.  We should only use links to repos that are part of the Swift open source project (which tensorflow/swift-apis is not) or third-party projects that are actively maintained.

Author: @rxwei will hyperlinking to SwiftFusion be sufficient? If not, then we should leave it as is.

Reviewer 2: I think that just removing it without a linked example is fine for the time being.

Author: ```suggestion
Many of these instructions have well-defined corresponding tangent instructions (for the differential) and adjoint instructions (for the pullback). It turns out that supporting transformations of a few common instructions is sufficient for many use cases. Here is a short table listing some of these instruction transformation rules:
```

| `y = tuple (x0, x1, ...)` | `tan[y] = tuple (tan[x0], tan[x1], ...)` | `adj[x0] += tuple_extract adj[y], 0` `adj[x1] += tuple_extract adj[y], 1` `...` [(code)](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/8b7ab1143e260d7bb1db3b98e24f7fe28dc7f0f0/lib/SILOptimizer/Mandatory/Differentiation.cpp#L5257)
| `y = tuple_extract x, <n>` | `tan[y] = tuple_extract tan[x], <n’>` | `adj[x] += tuple (0, ..., adj[y], ..., 0)` [(code)](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/8b7ab1143e260d7bb1db3b98e24f7fe28dc7f0f0/lib/SILOptimizer/Mandatory/Differentiation.cpp#L5298)
| `y = tuple_element_addr x, <n>` | `tan[y] = tuple_element_addr tan[x], <n’>` | No generated code. `adj[y] = tuple_element_addr adj[x], <n’>` [(code)](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/8b7ab1143e260d7bb1db3b98e24f7fe28dc7f0f0/lib/SILOptimizer/Mandatory/Differentiation.cpp#L4169)

In general, tangent transformation rules are simpler because the tangent transformation does not involve control flow reversal and because many instructions themselves are linear.

### Modules and access levels

> Swift organizes code into [modules](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/docs/Modules.rst). Modules enforce access controls on what code can be used outside of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Swift organizes code into [modules](Modules.rst). Modules enforce access controls on what code can be used outside of them.
```

> Differentiation is designed with modules and access levels in mind. `@differentiable` declaration attributes act like a “differentiability contract”: declarations marked with the attribute can be differentiated from other modules. This is because the differentiation transform is guaranteed to fill in all SIL differentiability witnesses with derivatives functions. Conversely, declarations not marked with `@differentiable` cannot be differentiated from other modules because they do not have registered derivative functions and are essentially opaque (their bodies may not be exposed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Differentiation is designed with modules and access levels in mind. `@differentiable` declaration attributes act like a "differentiability contract": declarations marked with the attribute can be differentiated from other modules. This is because the differentiation transform is guaranteed to fill in all SIL differentiability witnesses with derivatives functions. Conversely, declarations not marked with `@differentiable` cannot be differentiated from other modules because they do not have registered derivative functions and are essentially opaque (their bodies may not be exposed).
```

This design makes differentiation modular. The compiler does not need access to the bodies of cross-module declarations in order to differentiate them; it simply looks up their registered derivatives.

### Pseudocode

> TODO: Hyperlink pseudocode lines to actual code.

Here is the pseudocode of the main logic of the differentiation transform.

- For all differentiability witnesses in the current SIL module:
    - If the witness is missing the JVP function, generate a JVP function and fill it in.
    - If the witness is missing the VJP function, generate a VJP function and fill it in.
- Add all `differentiable_function` instructions from the current SIL module to a worklist.
- While the `differentiable_function` worklist is not empty, pop the next one.
    - If `differentiable_function` has JVP and VJP values, do nothing. It is already canonical.
    - If `differentiable_function` is missing JVP and VJP:
        - If the `differentiable_function`’s original function operand is an `differentiable_function_extract [original]` instruction, get the operand of that instruction. Do `differentiable_function_extract [jvp/vjp]` instruction from that operand to get the JVP/VJP. Continue.

>         - Otherwise, get the “original function reference” (`function_ref`, `witness_method`, or `class_method` instruction) underlying the `differentiable_function`’s original function operand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Otherwise, get the "original function reference" (`function_ref`, `witness_method`, or `class_method` instruction) underlying the `differentiable_function`’s original function operand.
```

>         - Look up a `@differentiable` declaration attribute on the “original function reference” whose parameter indices are a minimal superset of the `differentiable_function`’s parameter indices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Look up a `@differentiable` declaration attribute on the "original function reference" whose parameter indices are a minimal superset of the `differentiable_function`’s parameter indices.
```

            - If no such attribute exists, create an empty attribute with the `differentiable_function`’s parameter indices.
        - Process the minimal superset SIL differentiability witness:
            - If the attribute is missing the JVP function, generate a JVP function.
            - If the attribute is missing the VJP function, generate a VJP function.
        - Produce a reference to the JVP/VJP to fill in the `differentiable_function` instruction.

> JVP/VJP function generation is explained above. The pseudocode above does not mention how [non-differentiability errors](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#static-analysis) are handled. If a non-differentiable operation is encountered while processing a SIL differentiability witness or a `differentiable_function` instruction, the transform stops processing the item, continues onto the next item, and finally stops compilation after all items are processed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JVP/VJP function generation is explained above. The pseudocode above does not mention how [non-differentiability errors](DifferentiableProgramming.md#static-analysis) are handled. If a non-differentiable operation is encountered while processing a SIL differentiability witness or a `differentiable_function` instruction, the transform stops processing the item, continues onto the next item, and finally stops compilation after all items are processed.
```

  // function_ref AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR__pullback_src_0_wrt_0
  %21 = function_ref @AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR__pullback_src_0_wrt_0 : $@convention(thin) (Float, @owned _AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR_bb0__PB__src_0_wrt_0) -> Float // user: %22
  %22 = partial_apply [callee_guaranteed] %21(%20) : $@convention(thin) (Float, @owned _AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR_bb0__PB__src_0_wrt_0) -> Float // user: %23
  %23 = tuple (%17 : $Float, %22 : $@callee_guaranteed (Float) -> Float) // user: %24
  return %23 : $(Float, @callee_guaranteed (Float) -> Float) // id: %24
} // end sil function 'AD__$sS2fIegnr_S2fIegyd_TR__vjp_src_0_wrt_0'
```

- The reabstraction thunk VJP contains `%6 = differentiable_function [parameters 0] %5`, which must now be canonicalized. This starts by finding the underlying referenced original function.
- 💥`%5` is a function argument, so there is no underlying referenced original function! Differentiation fails and produces a non-differentiability error:

```
<unknown>:0: error: expression is not differentiable
<unknown>:0: note: opaque non-'@differentiable' function is not differentiable
```

> To support reabstraction thunk generation, we must find a way to avoid this “opaque non-@differentiable function” error. One straightforward solution is to change when the `@differentiable` function is formed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To support reabstraction thunk generation, we must find a way to avoid this "opaque non-@differentiable function" error. One straightforward solution is to change when the `@differentiable` function is formed:
```

- Make the reabstraction thunk JVP/VJP take a `@differentiable` function-typed argument.
- Make reabstraction thunk JVP/VJP callers construct and pass a `@differentiable` function-typed value.

This involves:
- Adding a JVP/VJP type calculation special case for reabstraction thunks.
- Changing the differentiation transform so that reabstraction thunk JVP/VJP callers always construct and pass a `@differentiable` function-typed value.

> This approach is implemented in https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/28570. A partially-applied reabstraction thunk derivative matches the derivative type of the reabstracted original function.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if we want to reference the pull request itself.  It would be nicer to point to the code, but I don't think that this is a big deal.

Author: We have pointed to specific lines of code in other documents (this one and/or the manifesto). That should be possible here.

Reviewer 2: Pointing to the code would be great!

Author: There isn't a specific line of code that would work well for this. In addition, the pull request's first comment gives a clear overview of how reabstraction was implemented.

Alternatives:

> - Make reabstraction thunk JVPs/VJPs take a “JVP/VJP” function-typed argument instead of a `@differentiable` function-typed argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Make reabstraction thunk JVPs/VJPs take a "JVP/VJP" function-typed argument instead of a `@differentiable` function-typed argument.
```

    - This seems more efficient because reabstraction thunk JVPs/VJPs only need to call the original function’s JVP/VJP - the other elements of the `@differentiable` function are not relevant.
    - It may be possible that the derivative of a reabstraction thunk is simply a reabstraction thunk for the derivative function’s type. If so, this would be a significant simplification: within the reabstraction thunk derivative, we can simply call another reabstraction thunk and avoid other code generation (e.g. reabstraction thunk differential/pullback functions).

>     - `JVPEmitter::visitApplyInst` and `VJPEmitter::visitApplyInst` need special case logic to transform the single `apply` in reabstraction thunks into an `apply` of the “JVP/VJP” function-typed argument.

Reviewer 2: Please update this to reference the correct code in main.

```suggestion
    - `JVPEmitter::visitApplyInst` and `VJPEmitter::visitApplyInst` need special case logic to transform the single `apply` in reabstraction thunks into an `apply` of the "JVP/VJP" function-typed argument.
```

Author: Could you provide the links to that code?

Reviewer: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/fecc88702406657ff01d25bb4e1655646e2b3ff7/lib/SILOptimizer/Differentiation/JVPCloner.cpp#L448
https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/fecc88702406657ff01d25bb4e1655646e2b3ff7/lib/SILOptimizer/Differentiation/VJPCloner.cpp#L411

Author: ```suggestion
    - `JVPCloner::visitApplyInst` and `VJPCloner::visitApplyInst` need special case logic to transform the single `apply` in reabstraction thunks into an `apply` of the "JVP/VJP" function-typed argument.
```

## Future directions and infrastructural changes

Below is a list of anticipated infrastructure changes to the Swift differentiation system. Non-core changes (e.g. API changes) are not listed here.

### Differential-first (forward-mode) automatic differentiation

Differential-first automatic differentiation is currently a work-in-progress. It is not yet at parity with the existing pullback-first (i.e. reverse-mode) automatic differentiation support.

> See [here](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#differential-operators) for more information about forward-mode differential operators in Swift.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [here](DifferentiableProgramming.md#differential-operators) for more information about forward-mode differential operators in Swift.
```

### Linear maps and transposition

Linear maps are a fundamental concept in differentiation. Since differentiation is linear approximation, the derivative of a linear map is itself.

We plan to add support for:
- Linear map function types (`@differentiable(linear)` function types), which are a subtype of `@differentiable` (and infinitely differentiable) function types.
- Linear map transposition as a first-class operation. This unlocks a correspondence between forward-mode and reverse-mode differentiation: `differentials and pullbacks are transposes of each other`.

> See [here](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#linear-maps) for more information about linear maps. With linear maps and transposition, the differentiation system will change in the following ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [here](DifferentiableProgramming.md#linear-maps) for more information about linear maps. With linear maps and transposition, the differentiation system will change in the following ways:
```

- All JVP functions will return a `@differentiable(linear)`-typed differential instead of a normal function-typed differential.
- VJP functions will be removed throughout the differentiation system.
- Pullback function generation will change to use transposition.

> ## How to contribute? 🤔
> 
> [JIRA link to AutoDiff starter bugs](https://bugs.swift.org/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20TF%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Open%20AND%20component%20in%20(Autodiff)%20AND%20labels%20in%20(StarterBug)). As of the time of this writing, there are no open starter bugs. If you are interested in helping with differentiable programming in Swift, please email [swift@tensorflow.org](mailto:swift@tensorflow.org) and we can help you find some starter tasks.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Leaving the JIRA link might be okay as well, if they are still relevant (but that deserves a proper scrub).  The mailto is not appropriate, and this work should encourage contributions as per the regular Swift development practices.

## Acknowledgements

> Please see [here](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md#acknowledgements) for a list of people who have influenced the design and the implementation of differentiable programming in Swift.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please see [here](DifferentiableProgramming.md#acknowledgements) for a list of people who have influenced the design and the implementation of differentiable programming in Swift.
```

> Some content is borrowed from the [Swift Differentiable Programming Manifesto](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/DifferentiableProgramming.md) by Richard Wei and [Probabilistic & Differentiable Programming Summit '19 slides](https://twitter.com/rxwei/status/1144688743468527617) - thank you Richard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some content is borrowed from the [Swift Differentiable Programming Manifesto](DifferentiableProgramming.md) by Richard Wei and [Probabilistic & Differentiable Programming Summit '19 slides](https://twitter.com/rxwei/status/1144688743468527617) - thank you Richard.
```
